__Context__ I originally wrote this content years ago for teaching my children. I happened to stumble across it today when cleaning up some repos, and thought with the current "everyone is home schooling" situation around COVID-19, it would be a good time to publish it.

Everything your body does needs to be powered. In your computer, the
power is electricity. In your body, the power comes from food. In
plants, the power (usually) comes from the sun. We have three main
kinds of energy in food: carbohydrates (carbs), lipids (fats), and
proteins. This is about carbs.

Your body is made up of lots of different cells: brain cells, heart
cells, muscle cells, skin cells. Every cell in your body can use
__glucose__ for energy. Let's start off by understanding what glucose
is made up of.

## Structure of glucose

Glucose is a _molecule_, which is made up of other _atoms_. In fact,
it's made up of 6 carbons **C**, 12 hydrogens **H**, and 6 oxygens
**O**. Hydrogen and oxygen together make water (H2O), which in greek
is _hydro_. That's where the word carbohydrate comes from: carbon +
hydro = carbohydrate.

Here are two different pictures of what the glucose molecule look
like:

<img src="/static/images/3dglucose.png" alt="3D glucose" style="width: 250px"> <img src="/static/images/2dglucose.png" alt="2D glucose" style="width: 250px">

### Energy in glucose

Each time two atoms are connected to each other, it's called a
_covalent bond_. Each bond has some energy in it. This is called
_chemical energy_. Your body needs to convert that chemical energy to
energy it can use to move your muscles, let your brain think, and
everything else. It does this by something called _cellular
respiration_.

The next bit is like a math formula. Remember that glucose has 6
carbons, 12 hydrogens, and 6 oxygens. From now on, we'll write that as
C6H12O6. Cellular respiration combines the glucose with oxygen (O2) to
make carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O). We'll play with the exact
math later in the first exercise. The cool thing is: when you do this
conversion, there are less covalent bonds at the end, so you free up
energy.

Plants do the opposite: they take carbon dioxide and water, and
combine it with energy from the sun using _photosynthesis_ to make
glucose and oxygen. That's why animals breathe in oxygen and breathe
out carbon dioxide, and plants do the opposite.

## Sugars

Glucose is one kind of a _sugar_. It's actually a _simple sugar_, or a
_monosaccharide_. _Mono_ is greek for "one", and _saccharide_ is Latin
for sugar. There are three different kinds of _monosaccharides_:

* Glucose
* Fructose
* Galactose

They all have the same number of carbons, hydrogens, and oxygens, but
they have slightly different shapes. This is important, because it
means that glucose can be used by _any_ part of the body. However,
fructose and galactose can only be used in the liver for producing
energy.

There are also _disaccharides_. _Di_ is Greek for "two," and these are
combinations of two simple sugars. Some common examples:

* Sucrose is a glucose and a fructose together
* Lactose is a glucose and a galactose together

When you hear of "sugar," or see a package with sugar in it, it's
usually sucrose. It's also called "table sugar."

Lactose is also known as milk sugar, and is made by mother animals
(mammals) for their babies. Fructose is sometimes called "fruit
sugar," because fruit has a lot of it.

## Polysaccharides

We can have more than just two sugars together. _Poly_ is the Greek
word for "many." One kind of polysaccharide is _starch_, which is a
long chain of glucose molecules. There are lots of foods that we eat
that have a lot of starch in them:

* Grains, like wheat, oats, and rice
* Potatoes
* Sweet potatoes

When you eat starch (or, for that matter, disaccharides), your stomach
and intenstines will break it down into the individual simple sugars,
which then get absorbed into your blood. Because starch takes longer
to break down to simple sugars, it gets absorbed more slowly into your
blood stream.

Another kind of polysaccharide is something animals make, called
_glycogen_. Glycogen is something your muscles and liver store for
energy. It's easy to turn into glucose, and can be used for quick
energy. It's really useful, for example, if you need to run really
fast for a short time, or lift heavy weights. That's why eating lots
of carbs before lifting weights helps so much.

Our bodies are very good at digesting (breaking down and absorbing)
starch. But there are other kinds of polysaccharides that our body
can't break down. These are known as cellulose, or fiber. Two
different things can happen with these:

* We poop them out. This is why eating lots of fiber makes us go to
  the bathroom more.
* The bacteria in our intestines (gut microbiome) breaks it down and
  turns it into fatty acids that we can absorb. This gives us some
  energy from fat, and gives our microbiome some food so it can grow.

This is why eating fiber is good for you: it helps you go to the
bathroom regularly, and have a healthy gut biome.

When we turn raw food, like wheat, into food we can eat, it's called
_processing_ it, or _refining_ it. _Highly refined_ foods are
processed a lot, and look less like the original raw food. For
example, wheat has lots of fiber in it, and whole wheat bread keeps
that fiber. But white bread is more processed, and has had the fiber
taken out. Highly processed carbs, like white bread, crackers, and
pretzels, are not very good for you: they have most of the fiber
stripped out!

## Good and bad of fructose

Fruit has lots of fiber, micronutrients (vitamins and minerals), and
water. It also has fructose, but mixed in with all of these other
things. Fruit is good for you, and you should eat it.

There's another cool thing about fructose: our tongues think that it
tastes sweeter than glucose. Lots of companies will use fructose to
make food taste better. And this is the bad side. With a little bit of
fructose in your fruit, your body is fine.

However, when you eat _lots_ of fructose, without the water and fiber
that comes in the fruit, your liver has to do lots of extra work. The
liver works very hard converting the fructose into other energy, like
fat, that your body can use. This makes your liver tired, and takes
away time from doing other things your body needs it to do.

Also, when you have too much fat stuck in your liver, your body can
develop something very dangerous, called _fatty liver disease_. This
can lead to insulin resistance, which can leads to lots of bad
diseases, like diabetes, cancer, and heart disease.

Lesson: don't eat too much extra sugar in your food, the extra
fructose can make you very sick over time!

## Exercises

1. When you have cellular respiration, your body takes one gluclose
   (C6H12O6) and 6 oxygen molecules (O2) and makes some number of
   carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) molecules.

    1. Figure out how many total carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms
       are in the glucose and 6 oxygen molecules.

    2. How many carbon dioxide molecules can you make out of that?

    3. How much stuff is left? How much water can you make out of that?

    4. Do you have any atoms left over?

2. What are the three monosaccharides?

3. Which sugar can be used in your whole body?

4. Where can the other two sugars be used in your body?

5. Which sugar do you find a lot of in fruit?

6. What is starch?

7. Which gets absorbed faster into your blood, glucose or starch?
   * BONUS QUESTION: What are some good and bad things you can think
     of from getting absorbed faster?

8. What's the name for the way animals store glucose in your livers
   and muscles?

9. What kind of carbohydrates are we bad at digesting? What kinds of
   good things do these do for us?

10. Name one of the bad diseases you can get from having too much
    fructose.
