I see an attitude expressed on forums often. This has happened for
years, and I usually ignore it. But I'm responding to it today because
I think the opinion is negative for the Haskell
community. And&mdash;hitting a bit closer to home for
me&mdash;negatively impacts my coworkers.

I'm an opinionated person. In my experience, most people who end up
writing Haskell are to some extent. I'm not afraid to share my
opinions on lots of topics, and I think that's healthy. Most people
who read my blog or Twitter feed know my opinions on language design,
API design, build tool design, nutrition, and exercise, for example.

Here's the two sentence summary of everything I'm going to say in this
blog post:

> * Just because I believe something does not make it FP Complete's belief.
> * Just because I believe something does not mean that everyone at FP Complete believes it.

I think I've interviewed every engineer who works for FP
Complete. When interviewing, I _do_ look for certain criteria. For
example, if I'm hiring for a Haskell development position, I look for
people who like and know Haskell. That's the closest thing to an "FP
Complete opinion" you can find: things which are intrinsic to the job.
I've never tried to hire someone who has identical opinions to me on
all topics. Not only would that be impossible to achieve, but it would
be bad for business: we _want_ a diversity of opinions, not a
monoculture.

Someone on our sales team recently brought a question to the
engineering team: "Why does FP Complete hate Nix?" He showed me the
comment in question. I won't point to the comment; it's neither
informative nor unique. Here's the answer: FP Complete has no
emotions. It's a company. We work on projects, and we have people who
do that work. I don't think _anyone_ on our team "hates" Nix. I
certainly don't, even if I'm usually one of the people on the team
saying we shouldn't use Nix for most projects (I can explain why that
happens separately, but it's off topic here). However:

* Even I will [recommend using Nix when I think it's the right tool
  for the
  job](https://www.snoyman.com/blog/2018/11/stackage-history-philosophy-future)
* _Many_ members of our team really love Nix

We have technical disagreements on our team. You've probably seen
members of the FP Complete team espousing those differing viewpoints
publicly. We regularly have technical debates about how to approach
things. This isn't just in the realm of Haskell. We debate DevOps
tooling, front end development, and even business objectives.

When someone joins the FP Complete team, they are agreeing to fulfill
the terms of their contract: do the work we ask from them, contribute
to our internal technical discussions, and so on. There is no pledge
of obedience to the "FP Complete will." Because it doesn't exist.

I feel almost silly writing up this blog post, because everything I'm
saying _should_ be automatic. However, it seems like something like
this needed to be said.

If you want to criticize something I've said, go for it. I've proven
over the years I'm always up for a technical debate. But couching it
as "FP Complete believes X" is lazy (in the bad way) and wrong. That
goes for generalizing from statements of other members of the team
too.
