Last week, I completed
[The Bridge](https://www.barbellmedicine.com/the-bridge/), an 8 week
strength program by Barbell Medicine. Since this program is
significantly different than what I've done in the past, and what I've
[talked about on this blog previously](https://www.snoyman.com/blog/2017/06/naive-overview-exercise),
I wanted to share my thoughts and some results.

__Summary__ This program was more complicated to follow than others
I've tried, but given that I was looking for an intermediate instead
of novice program, that's not surprising. I improved my actual 1 rep
max numbers on all 4 major lifts. I'm planning on continuing my
training with another cycle of the program.

## History

I've been lifting for close to 2 years now, with a few years of
bodyweight training before that. In the subset of that time that I've
been seriously training, I've followed these programs:

* [Start Bodyweight](http://www.startbodyweight.com/)
* [StrongLifts 5x5](https://stronglifts.com/)
* A few months of a Push-Pull-Leg (PPL) routine I made up, which was a
  mistake and gave me no progress. Pretend it didn't happen.
* [5/3/1](https://www.t-nation.com/workouts/531-how-to-build-pure-strength),
  with the Boring But Big (BBB) accessories

Ignoring the silly PPL, all three of these programs helped me
significantly. They also all share something: they're simple to
follow. First you determine where to start, which is either dictated
by the program or based on current abilities. Then you follow a simple
set of rules on how to progress. This simplicity is very appealing.

Start Bodyweight got me to a decent strength level, but I was unhappy
with weakness in my back leading to regular pain while sitting at my
desk. I switch to StrongLifts when I decided I wanted to do a barbell
program with deadlifts, and (as always happens with a novice program)
eventually hit a wall.

When I switched to 5/3/1, I immediately saw my estimated 1 rep max
(1RM) numbers going up. In fact, they went up
significantly. Unfortunately, I found that my _actual_ 1RM numbers
were not budging. It seemed that 5/3/1 was giving me an increase in
muscular _endurance_, but not necessarily strength. While the program
was fun, easy to follow, and required relatively little time in the
gym, I wanted more progress.

__NOTE__ I know there are _many_ variations of 5/3/1 out there, and
likely some of them would have served me better. I'm not comparing all
potential programs in the world, just the ones I've actually pursued
myself.

## Overview of The Bridge

Over the past half year or so, I've been regularly exposed&mdash;via
YouTube videos and articles&mdash;to the team behind Barbell Medicine,
mainly Drs. Jordan Feigenbaum and Austin Baraki. When I was in the
market for a new program, I heard mention of The Bridge program, and
downloaded it.

The Bridge is delivered as a PDF. The program itself takes up about 5
pages in this 36 page document. The rest of the material is a bit dry
to get through, but immensely useful and informative. I really
appreciate the way the authors have given a background on the concepts
of stress, training volume, and intensity. If you're at all interested
in strength training, give it a read.

The program focuses on the main barbell lifts (squat, overhead press,
bench press, deadlift) with accessories (e.g., barbell row, pin squat,
paused deadlift). Unlike other programs I'd followed, this program
changes from week to week. That makes it more complicated to follow,
but not significantly. The real curve ball is the Rate of Perceived
Exertion scale, or RPE.

## RPE based training

In a program like Strong Lifts, I go into the gym on a Tuesday, and I
know that I'm going to try to squat X amount of weight for Y sets of Z
reps. Not so with The Bridge. Instead, you'll see something like:

> Squats: 5 @ 6 RPE, 5 @ 7 RPE, 5 @ 8 RPE for 3 sets

This means that, after my warmup sets, I need to start with a set of 5
squats at an exertion level of 6. The scale goes up to 10, and each
number below 10 indicates how many more reps you could have possibly
done. So RPE 6 means "I could have done 4 more reps." Therefore, "5
reps at 6 RPE" means "choose a weight that you can just barely do 9
reps for, then do 5 reps at that weight."

When I first saw this, I was dumbfounded. "How do I guess the magical
weight number?" And in fact, that _was_ the most complicated part of
this program for all 8 weeks. There are charts in the PDF that help
you compare against your 1 rep max. But overall, it was trial and
error. There were definitely sets where I lifted more than I should
have, and sets where I could have added more weight.

In contrast to a simple numeric guide like Strong Lifts or 5/3/1
delivers, an RPE based scale allows you to easily adjust training
intensity to account for both good and bad days in the gym. A few
times during this program, I had a bad night's sleep or a bit of a
cold, and lifted less weight. A few times, I was feeling great and
lifted more than I would have expected. RPE allowed this to happen. By
contrast, with both SL and 5/3/1, there were days where the weight
felt easy, and other days when it felt crushing.

Ultimately, my conclusion to all of this was: RPE is harder than a
number based scale, but gives great results. Just accept the fact that
you're going to screw up regularly.

## Difficulty level

The program is broken up into weeks of different stress level, either
low, moderate, or high. The weeks also tend to focus on either high
volume or high intensity. For example, both weeks 4 and 7 are
considered high stress weeks, but compare the first day's squat
programming:

* Week 4: 5 @ RPE 6, 5 @ 7, 5 @ 8 x 4 sets
* Week 7: 1 @ RPE 8, 3 @ 8 x 4 sets

Week 4's day 1 ends up having 30 total reps of squat, whereas week 7
has 13. However, because of how the RPE scale works, you'll end up
lifting much heavier weight on week 7. For example, "5 @ RPE 8" means
a weight you could have done 7 reps at. "3 @ RPE 8" means you could
have done 5. You can lift more weight for 5 reps than you can for 7,
and therefore week 7 ends up with a lower volume at higher intensity.

Personally, I really liked the later weeks in the program. None of the
other pgorams I'd tried ever got to low volume high intensity. But
having read the PDF and its motivations, I understand why we need both
the volume and intensity weeks, and appreciate the way the program is
designed. In fact, having completed the program, I think I understand
the design of the program much better than before.

## Cardio

Unlike previous programs I've done, this program included cardio. I
considered this a good kick in the pants to start running and the
eliptical again. If you're like me: find a good audio book to listen
to, otherwise it will be 30 minutes of hell :)

(Not entirely accidentally, I also signed up for an Audible account
around the same time I started this program.)

## Time in gym

The earlier weeks in this program have high volume, with lots of
sets. I spend a _long_ time in the gym some weeks: 3 days of lifting
for about 2 hours each, and 1-2 days doing about 45 minutes of
cardio. You can reduce that by having shorter rest periods or
supersetting your warmups for the next lift with your previous working
sets, or you can answer emails and Slack messages. (Fortunately no one
can smell your sweat over email.)

## Results

Way back in May of last year, my gym had a "powerlifting competition."
I put that in quotes since there were four of us, I was the only one
in my weight class (everyone else weighed 20kg more than me), and some
of the other competitors half repped their squats. (I'm going to pray
that I actually squatted to depth, since there were no videos and I
don't trust the judges.) Between that time and starting this program
at the end of October, I increased my estimated 1RM numbers
significantly, but to my recollection barely, if at all, bested my
powerlifting meet numbers with actual weight.

There are some minor confounding factors in these increases due to my
addition of chalk to assist with my deadlift, and getting more
comfortable with my lifting belt (the competition was the first time I
ever used a lifting belt). Nonetheless, I think a good portion of
these increases can be attributed to my time on The Bridge:

* Squat: 20% increase
* Overhead press: 16% increase\*
* Bench press: 11% increase
* Deadlift: 19% increase

\* If you're wondering: no, the powerlifting competition did not
include an overhead press. I'm including a number from around the same
time.

Definitely keep in mind that I _do_ believe my time on 5/3/1 in the
interim helped at the very least with my muscular endurance, and most
likely primed me to be able to hit the volume weeks of The Bridge
better than I would have been able to in May. I would not expect to
make those kinds of increases in just 8 weeks.

## Conclusion

This was my first time taking a foray into an intermediate program,
intended for lifters who are no longer making linear progressions with
novice programs like Strong Lifts. I can finally understand why Mark
Rippetoe says
[you want to be a novice](https://startingstrength.com/article/programming/who_wants_to_be_a_novice_you_do):
simple programs with great results are much more fun.

If you've got the time to spend in the gym on higher volume routines,
have the patience to figure out the RPE system, want to learn more
about strength programming, and are looking for a well designed
intermediate program, I recommend checking out The Bridge.

For myself: when it comes to health and fitness, I consider this at
least half an experiment with sample size of 1, and therefore I like
to try out many different things. I'm going to keep my eyes out for a
new routine to try (and if you have recommendations, let me know). But
given the great progress this program helped me achieve, I'm going to
continue with at least one more cycle of it before moving on to
something new.

If you want me to share more experience reports like this in the
future, let me know. I can also include the nutrition side of things
if people are interested, which has been possibly more volatile for me
over the past year than the training itself.

## Additional reading

I've added this section to collect additional links to helpful articles that
may be relevant to people interested in The Bridge. Expect it to grow over
time.

* https://www.jenreviews.com/workout-routines/
